Add docs for telemetry (#12582)
enso-org/enso: docs/infrastructure/logging.md

one of the main components, allowing other components to connect to it. The
service aggregates all logs in one place for easier analysis of the interaction
between components. Components can also log to console or files directly without
involving the centralized logging service. For more information about this

> architecture, see [Logging server](#logging-server)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
architecture, see [Logging server](#logging-server).
```

single appender can be selected at a time, although additional
[logging to file](#logging-to-file) is supported. The selection may also be done
via an environmental variable but it depends on which component we are
executing:

#### Project Manager

Project manager by default starts a centralized logging server that collects
logs (as defined in `logging-service.server` config key) and the logs output can
be overwritten by `ENSO_LOGSERVER_APPENDER` env variable

For example, for the project manager to output to `console` one simply executes

```
ENSO_LOGSERVER_APPENDER=console ./project-manager
```

#### Engine runner

When executing the engine runner component, i.e., CLI usage, via `ensoup` or
`enso`, the default log output can be overwritten by defining the

> `ENSO_APPENDER_DEFAULT` env variable

Reviewer: +1

service. If `debug` value is `true`, logging will print to stdout additional
trace information of the logging process itself.

## Logging server

> The centralised logging service is implemented as a logging server started by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The centralized logging service is implemented as a logging server started by
```
We should be consistent in spelling of the "central..." words. US spelling is preferred as far as I know.

the
[Project Manager](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/c47dba1d108e0d52e401333d1b6f6f4182436aa7/lib/scala/project-manager/src/main/scala/org/enso/projectmanager/boot/ProjectManager.scala#L326-L345).
The implementation of logging server is in
[org.enso.logging.service.logback.LoggingServer](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/da6a6ae9dde9c0cef02c1d07be5e03660b40d086/lib/scala/logging-service-logback/src/main/java/org/enso/logging/service/logback/LoggingServer.java).
The logging server
[listens](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/da6a6ae9dde9c0cef02c1d07be5e03660b40d086/lib/scala/logging-service-logback/src/main/java/org/enso/logging/service/logback/SocketServer.java#L56)

> to clients that connect via a socket. The client is, for example, language

Reviewer: How does the `enso` process find out which port (and possibly also a host) to connect to? Is there some environment variable? If so, it deserves to be documented here.

Author: CC @hubertp. Are you willing to put your knowledge here? Because I have no idea.

server that is started as a subprocess by the project manager. The clients use
[org.enso.logging.service.logback.DeferredProcessingSocketAppender](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/566d3d503e35ccf8c363facd590d1332683bce3a/lib/scala/logging-service-logback/src/main/java/org/enso/logging/service/logback/DeferredProcessingSocketAppender.java)
to send log events to the logging server. The logging server then properly
dispatches the received logging event to all the appenders in

> [SocketLoggingNode](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/3e0b4dd7413e45373dc4ac26f124ee6aedffd50c/lib/scala/logging-service-logback/src/main/java/org/enso/logging/service/logback/SocketLoggingNode.java#L87-L94).

Reviewer: This describes how the logging works in the IDE, right?
- we should stress that this section talks about the IDE mode
- How does that work in the CLI mode? Is it different?

Author: Good point. Described in 40b6ac71e98de8626c05d1822ac5bc3eab9626af

> ## Telemetry

Reviewer: What is telemetry?

Telemetry gathers anonymized, yet still useful information about the environment Enso IDE operates at. Such metadata (not user data) are send "home" to improve planning and further help to optimize Enso user experience.

Author: Added this paragraph in 8198a0f182253b76856499b02b07cd12241b5483

> Collection of telemetry events is implemented via logging. The motivation for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Telemetry events are just logging messages in a special format. 
```

> that is that we want to be able to collect telemetry from all possible sources -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using logging infrastructure makes it easy to collect telemetry from all possible sources -
```

engine, standard libraries, language server and project manager. All the
telemetry events are visible in our OpenSearch dashboard. To properly send
telemetry logs to the cloud, the used logger and the log message must conform to
the specification described below. The original proposal of the specification is
in

> [#12464](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/issues/12464#issuecomment-2713545076).

Reviewer: Copy the specification. No need to reference it. Maybe it changes in future and we are unlikely to keep #12464 in sync with future changes. Make this documentation the primary source of the specification.

Author: In f16ca2b411f2936e0173bb2cb8c004dd636db519, I have removed the reference to the original proposal altogether. The spec is copied here. Let's consider this doc as the ultimate source of truth about telemetry.

follow this specification, it will not be forwarded to the cloud endpoint. The
message consist of two parts: `message` and `arguments` delimited by a colon:
`<message>: <arguments>`. The `message` part is a string that describes the
event. The `arguments` part is a mapping of `name={}` pairs separated by a
comma. Note that for the compatibility with standard `ch.qos.logback` appenders,
it is important that the value of argument is `{}`. The actual argument values
are passed to the message as argument array via
`ILoggingEvent.getArgumentArray()` method. Number of these arguments must match
number of the arguments given in the message.

An example in Java is:

```java
logger.trace("MyEvent: name={}, age={}", "John", 42);
```

In Enso, one has to use
[org.slf4j.spi.LoggingEventBuilder](https://github.com/qos-ch/slf4j/blob/master/slf4j-api/src/main/java/org/slf4j/spi/LoggingEventBuilder.java)
like this:

```
event_bldr = logger.atTrace
event_bldr.setMessage "MyEvent: name={}, age={}"
event_bldr.addArgument "John"
event_bldr.addArgument 42
event_bldr.log
```

The reason for that is that the `trace` method accepts vararg and there is no

> way to pass a vararg arguments from Enso to Java.

Reviewer: This is a Truffle API limitation. Not something that could be fixed on Enso side.

Author: Note added in 6ae6a7a07ee7c2b05008229269c6da070531f102

### Transforming LogEvent to HTTP POST request

If the LogEvent has the correct aforementioned format, it is delegated to the
`TelemetryAppender` that is responsible for sending HTTP POST requests
asynchronously to the cloud endpoint. The payload of the message looks roughly
like this:

```json
{
  "message": "MyEvent",
  "metadata": {
    "loggerName": "org.enso.telemetry.MyLogger",
    "name": "John",
    "age": 42
  }
}
```

The actual format expected by the cloud is defined at
[logs/endpoints/remote.rs](https://github.com/enso-org/cloud-v2/blob/main/src/lambdas/src/lambdas/logs/endpoints/remote.rs#L169).

> If the format of the LogEvent does not follow the specification, there will be a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the format of the LogEvent violates the specification, a warning will be ...
```

warning in the logs, and nothing will be sent.

### Log level

TelemetryAppender is enabled by default for all logging levels. If you wish to
send telemetry event only to the TelemetryAppender, use `TRACE` level. If you
use `DEBUG` level, it will, by default, be also send to the FileAppender. If you
use `INFO` level, it will, by default, be also send to the FileAppender and

> ConsoleAppender.

Reviewer: Out of curiosity: 
- can I change log level of just `org.enso.telemetry` namespace?
- without changing the code (e.g. `application.conf` files)?
- how can I do it for CLI?

Author: Currently, Telemetry Appender cannot be disabled - explained in 791cee5e91c183b2aed7fa2fece1baba65d9dd16. This is a limitation now that can be alleviated in the future, if we want to be able to disable it.

Author: No telemetry is collected when running via CLI - cd0eff9cf710332cd226031cfaec6ba8ce9ffb47

Note that in order for the full stacktrace to be printed, pattern in the desired
appender must not contain `%nopex` formatting key. See [formatting](#format) for
details.

> ## Log a telemetry event

Reviewer: +1
